---
layout: post
title:  "ArcadeRS 1.4: Views"
date:   2015-07-07 17:33:00
categories: arcaders
---

This is the fourth part of a series whose objective is to explore the Rust
programming language through the development of a simple, old-school shooter.
It is composed of 16 parts, excluding the [introduction](/2015/185/arcaders-1-0):

  1. [A simple window](/2015/185/arcaders-1-1), where we install SDL2
  2. [Event handling](/2015/187/arcaders-1-2), where we discuss lifetimes
  3. [More event handling](/2015/187/arcaders-1-3), where we discuss macros
  4. [Views](/2015/188/arcaders-1-4), where we learn about boxes, pattern matching, trait objects, and dynamic dispatch
  5. [Switching views](#), where we use boxes, pattern matching, trait objects, and dynamic dispatch
  6. [A moving rectangle](#), where we draw _things_
  7. [Main menu](#), where we play with textures and Rust's vectors
  8. [Sprites](#), where we create shareable images
  9. [Backgrounds](#), where we handle resizing, scale and translate through time
  10. [The player's ship](#), where we control a multi-sprite object
  11. [Shooting bullets](#), where we handle resource pooling
  12. [Animated sprites](#), where we render animated asteroids
  13. [Asteroid attack!](#), where we make multiple objects interact
  14. [Explosions](#), where we see things do _boom_.
  15. [Music](#), where we hear things go _boom_.
  16. [High score & wrap-up](#), where we play with the filesystem


> Brace yourself, Rustaceans! For after following the track of the Ancestors
> through the _Forest of lifetimes confusion_ and roaming the lands of
> _Macro the Great_, we shall now enter the _Kingdom of_... wait... _traits_?

I mean, traits are like interfaces in Java or abstract classes in C++, _right_?
There isn't much to it. I mean, yeah, a trait can provide a default
implementation for a method, but Java 8 can do that, too, and so did C++, like,
decades ago! What's all the hype about?

It's not like you can automate conditional trait implementation... wait, you can?
Well, I mean, it's not like you can design a programming language that knows
about _asynchronous types_, operator overloading, closures, and all these other
goodies using a system so simple... wait, you can? At least you cannot implement
traits for types defined in another crate... wait you _can_? And you're going to
_use_ that in practice? _In the seventh chapter_?

Or like... wait! Rust doesn't have inheritance. So traits are the only way to
share methods between different types.

What is this madness?

> And so our audacious adventurers entered the _Kingdom of traits_, searching for
> the _power of simplicity_ hidden somewhere by the Patriarch Graydon Hoare. As
> they followed the road to the city of _composition over inheritance_, they saw
> that horses and other creatures were freely running across the lands. They soon
> realised that, contrary to their contemporaries in the Olde Lands, these were
> free from _backwards compatibility_, which had plagued their programming
> languages for decades. Stuttering with disbelief, many were surprised that a
> language could [ship without so many of these things](http://graydon2.dreamwidth.org/218040.html) 
> that they previously considered to be either fundamental features, or caveats
> inherent to the dynasty of systems programming languages.

Some resources to look at before we begin:

* [Abstraction without overhead: traits in Rust](http://blog.rust-lang.org/2015/05/11/traits.html)

As always, skim through it. Get the principle, we'll work on the detail.


## Views

In this article, we are going to define the interface shared by the different
_views_ of our game. Basically, a view is a _context_ of the game. For example,
the main menu is a view, a cutscene is a view, and the part of the game where
you shoot on asteroids is yet another view.

A view can do three things. It can be selected as the main view (we say that it
is _shown_), it can be replaced by another view (we say that it is _hidden_),
and it can be _rendered_ (which also takes care of the view's logic). In a way,
a view allows to abstract away the main rendering loop, letting us concentrate
only on the game logic and rendering.

But then, what if we would like to interact with the game loop? There are two
ways in which we could do this. The Java way, where we pass a reference to an
object which provides access to the Phi API, or in the more _functional_ way
(in the sense of _functional programming_), where our `render` method returns
an object representing whathever it wants the game loop to do, such as break,
or change the view it renders.

It turns out that, although the second way seems pretty unnatural in Java or in
C++, Rust has an ace up its sleeve: discriminated unions (or `enum`s). They
allow not only to return a choice (like an enum in C++), but also to pass
arguments to it. For example, one could send the new view to be shown with the
request to change it.

So, here's our trait, that you can add on the top of your `main.rs` file for
the moment:

```rust
/// A `ViewAction` is a way for the currently executed view to
/// communicate with the game loop. It specifies which action
/// should be executed before the next rendering.
pub enum ViewAction {
    None,
    Quit,
}

pub trait View {
    /// Called when `self` becomes the main, rendered view.
    fn resume(&mut self, context: &mut Phi);
    
    /// Called when `self` stops being the main, rendered view.
    fn pause(&mut self, context: &mut Phi);
    
    /// Called on every frame to take care of both the logic and
    /// the rendering of the current view.
    ///
    /// `elapsed` is expressed in seconds.
    fn render(&mut self, context: &mut Phi, elapsed: f64) -> ViewAction;
}
```

`ViewAction` acts as our demand to the main loop, and it is returned by the
`render` method of our `View` trait. So far, nothing _too_ complicated, and
nothing that C++ cannot do. Don't worry, it will get more interesting soon
enough! For the moment, though, I want to direct your attention toward the
`Phi` type appearing in the signature of the `render` method. Here's how we
define it:

```rust
/// Bundles the Phi abstractions in a single structure which
/// can be passed easily between functions.
pub struct Phi<'p, 'r> {
    pub events: Events<'p>,
    pub renderer: Renderer<'r>,
}
```

I'd let you guess what the `Phi` type is, but the comment pretty much gave it
away. It's just a way to write...

```rust
view.render(&mut context, elapsed);
```

... instead of...

```rust
view.render(&mut renderer, &mut events, elapsed);
```

It will also us to do some _caching_ and other performance optimizations when
we start working with external resources. Before we go any further, though, now
seems a good moment to organize a bit our files.


## File organization

After moving things around on my system, I got something like this:

    .
    |-- Cargo.toml
    `-- src
        |-- main.rs
        |-- phi
        |   |-- events.rs
        |   `-- mod.rs
        `-- views
            `-- mod.rs

The `phi/` directory is where we will put the parts of our code which are
independent of our game and can be reused on other projects. If you remember
our quick discussion on modules in the second part of the series, you know that
when a module `rob` declares a sub-module called `bob` and the rust compiler
doesn't find a file with the name `bob.rs` in the same directory, it will look
for a sub-directory named `bob/` containing a file named `mod.rs`, whose
content will become that of the `rob::bob` module.

This means that, if we add a `mod phi` statement to the top of our `main.rs`
file, the content of `phi/mod.rs` will become that of the `::phi` module. If we
then declare a module called `events` inside `phi/mod.rs`, then the content of
the module `::phi::events` will be assigned to that of `phi/events.rs`.

So, here's what our code should look like after we create all these files and
move some components from one file to another:

```rust
// main.rs

extern crate sdl2;
mod phi;
mod views;

use ::sdl2::pixels::Color;
use ::phi::Events;

fn main() {
    // Initialize SDL2
    let mut sdl_context = sdl2::init().video()
        .build().unwrap();
    
    // Create the window
    let window = sdl_context.window("ArcadeRS Shooter", 800, 600)
        .position_centered().opengl()
        .build().unwrap();
    
    let mut renderer = window.renderer()
        .accelerated()
        .build().unwrap();
    
    let mut events = Events::new(sdl_context.event_pump());
    
    'game_loop: loop {
        events.pump();
        
        if true == events.now.quit || Some(true) == events.now.key_escape {
            break 'game_loop;
        }
        
        renderer.set_draw_color(Color::RGB(0, 0, 0));
        renderer.clear();
        renderer.present();
    }
}
```

```rust
// phi/mod.rs

use ::sdl2::render::Renderer;

#[macro_use] mod events;

struct_events!(
    keyboard: {
        key_escape: Escape,
        key_up: Up,
        key_down: Down
    },
    else: {
        quit: Quit { .. }
    }
);


/// Bundles the Phi abstractions in a single structure which
/// can be passed easily between functions.
pub struct Phi<'p, 'r> {
    pub events: Events<'p>,
    pub renderer: Renderer<'r>,
}

/// A `ViewAction` is a way for the currently executed view to
/// communicate with the game loop. It specifies which action
/// should be executed before the next rendering.
pub enum ViewAction {
    None,
    Quit,
}

pub trait View {
    /// Called when `self` becomes the main, rendered view.
    fn resume(&mut self, context: &mut Phi);
    
    /// Called when `self` stops being the main, rendered view.
    fn pause(&mut self, context: &mut Phi);
    
    /// Called on every frame to take care of both the logic and
    /// the rendering of the current view.
    ///
    /// `elapsed` is expressed in seconds.
    fn render(&mut self, context: &mut Phi, elapsed: f64) -> ViewAction;
}
```

```rust
// phi/events.rs

macro_rules! struct_events {
    (
        keyboard: { $( $k_alias:ident : $k_sdl:ident ),* },
        else: { $( $e_alias:ident : $e_sdl:pat ),* }
    )
    => {
        use ::sdl2::event::EventPump;
        

        pub struct ImmediateEvents {
            $( pub $k_alias : Option<bool> , )*
            $( pub $e_alias : bool ),*
        }

        impl ImmediateEvents {
            pub fn new() -> ImmediateEvents {
                ImmediateEvents {
                    $( $k_alias: None , )*
                    $( $e_alias: false ),*
                }
            }
        }


        pub struct Events<'p> {
            pump: EventPump<'p>,
            pub now: ImmediateEvents,
            
            $( pub $k_alias: bool ),*
        }

        impl<'p> Events<'p> {
            pub fn new(pump: EventPump<'p>) -> Events<'p> {
                Events {
                    pump: pump,
                    now: ImmediateEvents::new(),
                    
                    $( $k_alias: false ),*
                }
            }
            
            pub fn pump(&mut self) {
                self.now = ImmediateEvents::new();
            
                for event in self.pump.poll_iter() {
                    use ::sdl2::event::Event::*;
                    use ::sdl2::keyboard::Keycode::*;

                    match event {
                        KeyDown { keycode, .. } => match keycode {
                            $(
                                Some($k_sdl) => {
                                    // Prevent multiple presses when keeping a key down
                                    // Was previously not pressed?
                                    if !self.$k_alias {
                                        // Key pressed
                                        self.now.$k_alias = Some(true);
                                    }
                                
                                    self.$k_alias = true;
                                }
                            ),*
                            _ => {}
                        },
                        
                        KeyUp { keycode, .. } => match keycode {
                            $(
                                Some($k_sdl) => {
                                    // Key released
                                    self.now.$k_alias = Some(false);
                                    self.$k_alias = false;
                                }
                            ),*
                            _ => {}
                        },
                        
                        $(
                            $e_sdl => {
                                self.now.$e_alias = true;
                            }
                        )*,
                    
                        _ => {}
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

```rust
// views/mod.rs

// Nothing to see here.
```

It should now compile and run as usual.
I let you figure out how this all works out.

It is to be noted that, in the `phi/mod.rs` file, we did not actually declare
`events` to be a public sub-module. This means that other files will not be
able to import our macro; the `Events` structure, however, _is_ made public
automatically by `struct_events!`. This is the expected behaviour.

Alright, now time to play with views!


## Boxes and trait objects

The idea of _trait objects_ is simple in theory, and harder to implement in
practice. However, as with most things in Rust, the compiler takes most of the
work out of us. This means, for C++ developers, that there is no need to write
the `virtual` keyword everywhere: the compiler will detect which methods need
to be virtual and handle _dynamic dispatch_ automatically. If you've ever done
polymorphism in C++, this announcement should make you feel suddenly lighter.
The others, who probably have no clue of what I am talking about, will simply
not have to deal with this _low-level madness_. Hopefully, ever.


### Static dispatch

Now, _static dispatch_ allows functions to receive arguments of many types
without having to rewrite the code &mdash; as long as these functions implement
whathever traits are needed to get the job done. For example, one could write a
function which sums up a `Vec` of _things_ (`T`).

```rust
fn sum_vec<T: Add<T, Output = T>>(zero: T, args: Vec<T>) -> T {
    args.into_iter().fold(zero, |acc, val| acc + val)
}
```

Akin to structures, functions can be _confgured_ to work with different types.
Here, we say that, as long as we pass to `sum_vec` arguments which can be added
together to produce another value of the same type, Rust will automatically
create a new `sum_vec::<Whatever>` function which executes as described. In a
way, `sum_vec<T>` is just a _pattern_ for the compiler to work with and the
actual function _is_ `sum_vec::<Whatever>`!

In fact, this is exactly how it is represented in memory (in Rust, at least),
but we do not have to rewrite the same code over and over: we provide a pattern
and Rust fills the gaps behind the scenes... or does it? Actually, it is not
happening behind the scenes at all! If we wanted to call this functions with
32-bits integers of type `i32`, for example, we would write something like:

```rust
// total: i32 = 6
let total = sum_vec::<i32>(0, vec![ 1, 2, 3 ]);
```

This is actually what you have to write in many languages which have a generic
behaviour. However, like with types in general, Rust _infers_ which variation
should be called, automatically. That way, if _feels_ like a duck-typed language
such as Python, yet you get _even more garantees_ than most statically-typed
languages. Sometimes, you have to help the compiler and write the full
`func::<A, B, C>` syntax but, most of the time, it simply _gets it_.


### Dynamic dispatch

So, that was static dispatch. It happens when the compiler is able to infer the
types of everything and generate the corresponding functions at compile-time.
But what if it cannot infer them: what if the types of a generic function's
arguments only _exist_ at run-time. In this case, we have to resolve to
_dynamic dispatch_.

Because of the way modern processors work, it is not possible to store values
for which we do not know the size at compile time in the same way that we have
done so far, that is on the _stack_. What we _can_ do, however, is store the
_address_ of such values, because it has a constant size no matter the type.
The trick, then, is to store the values on the _heap_ and to access them
indirectly using a _pointer_.

A language such as C uses `malloc` and `free` to deal with the heap, but Rust
comes with a better solution out of the box... literally. The standard library
defines a type called `Box<T>`, which allocates a value of type `T` on the heap
and automatically _frees_ it once the pointer gets out of scope. Other than
that, we can use a `Box` in almost the same way as we would for a _normal_
value. For example:

```rust
{
    // We can allocate memory
    let mut x = Box::new(4.0f64);
    
    // Call methods on the value
    assert_eq!(2.0, x.sqrt());
    
    {    
        // Get references to the value
        let r = &mut x;
        
        // Call methods on references to it
        assert_eq!(2.0, r.sqrt());
    }
    
    // Dereference it when you want to work with _contained_ value
    let y = *x + 4.0;
    assert_eq!(y, 8.0);
    
    // Then `x` gets out of scope and is freed like any other normal value
}
```

Not only is the `Box` type completely safe, using it has _no cost whatsoever_
at runtime when compared to dealing with a _real_, unsafe pointers manually.

Now, about dynamic dispatch. Storing values in boxes is cute and all, but there
is no real point in doing it. In the previous example, it would have been much
simpler (and more efficient) to simply use a stack-allocated value. Where boxes
get _interesting_ is when you do not know exactly what the type of the value it
stores is, at compile-time.

Simplified example: say we want to store a bunch of _things_ in a vector. Now,
in our system, there are many types which can be used to represent _things_, so
we are going to create a `Thing` interface and implement it for `A` and `B`. We
can then create a collection `things` of type `Vec<Box<Thing>>`.

Let `x` be an element of `things`. We do not know whether it is of type `A` or
`B`, but we know that it implements `Thing` and that `Thing` has a method
called `do_something_interesting()`, which takes no argument and returns an i32.

Here's the code:

```rust
pub trait Thing {
    fn do_something_interesting(&self) -> i32;
}

pub struct A;
impl Thing for A {
    fn do_something_interesting(&self) -> i32 {
        1
    }
}

pub struct B;
impl Thing for B {
    fn do_something_interesting(&self) -> i32 {
        2
    }
}

pub fn do_something_to_everyone(everyone: &Vec<Box<Thing>>) -> Vec<i32> {
    everyone.iter().map(|thing| thing.do_something_interesting()).collect()
}
```

Actually, even if `Thing`, `A` and `B` were in different files (or even in
different _crates_), the fact that both implement `Thing` allow us to put them
together in the same vector, as long as we specify that the elements of this
vector must be of a type `T: Thing` (`T` which implements `Thing`).

Now, if you run `do_something_to_everyone`, you will get an array containing
1's and 2's. If you come from a dynamic language such as Ruby, you may ask
yourself: _what's the big deal_? The big deal is that, in our static language,
we were able to dynamically choose which method to call depending on the type
(or rather, Rust was). We _dynamically dispatched_ the correct method.

This is how we do _polymorphism_.


### Trait objects

One question you might now ask is: because we were able to store a bunch of
values whose type we didn't know in a vector of boxes, could we store a single
value whose type we do not know in a box? That way, perhaps, we might be able
to store the _current view_ without knowing what _kind_ of view it is, as long
as we know that it implements the methods `show`, `hide` and `render`. The
answer to this question is yes.

Our current view would then be called a _trait object_ and it would have type
`Box<YourTrait>`.

And this is exactly what we're going to do... in the next article!


## Conclusion

If you run the code that we've written up to now, you might realize that it
does exactly the same thing as it did at the end of the last article. In fact,
this is because we have not yet used views. Like at all. Your compiler might
even be warning you about _dead code_.

But worry not. What we have done now is significant, not code-wise, but
brain-wise. Once you understand what this crazy talk about static- VS
dynamic-dispatch and trait objects, you'll have solid bases to go forward.
Plus, the [next article](#) should not disappoint you. On the menu,
we will have closures, pattern matching on the result of a dynamic method call
to change the type of the next caller and, most importantly, plenty of pretty
colors.

But until then, keep rusting!