---
layout: post
title:  "ArcadeRS 1.2: Event Handling"
date:   2015-07-06 12:00:00
categories: arcaders
---

This is the second part of a series whose objective is to explore the Rust
programming language through the development of a simple, old-school shooter.
It is composed of 16 parts, excluding the [introduction](/arcaders/2015/07/04/arcaders-1-0):

  1. [A simple window](/arcaders/2015/07/04/arcaders-1-1), where we install SDL2
  2. [Event handling](/arcaders/2015/07/06/arcaders-1-2), where we discuss lifetimes
  3. [More event handling](#), where we discuss macros
  4. [Views](#), where we discover the principal abstraction we will use throughout our program
  5. [Switching views](#), where we learn about pointers, pattern matching, trait objects, and dynamic dispatch
  6. [A moving rectangle](#), where we draw _things_
  7. [Main menu](#), where we play with textures and Rust's vectors
  8. [Sprites](#), where we create shareable images
  9. [Backgrounds](#), where we handle resizing, scale and translate through time
  10. [The player's ship](#), where we control a multi-sprite object
  11. [Shooting bullets](#), where we handle resource pooling
  12. [Animated sprites](#), where we render animated asteroids
  13. [Asteroid attack!](#), where we make multiple objects interact
  14. [Explosions](#), where we see things do _boom_.
  15. [Music](#), where we hear things go _boom_.
  16. [High score & wrap-up](#), where we play with the filesystem


Today's article will focus on creating a couple `struct`s for handling events,
abstracting away rust-sdl's EventPump. It's going to be a long and dense one,
because we're going to explore a _lot_ of concepts. On the menu: lifetimes in
type declarations, options, pattern matching (with destructuring), macros, and
`use` statements in a module and in a function.

We're not going to add every single property that we will need during the next
articles. In fact, we will only handle closing the window and pressing Escape.
As such, some of the things that we will do may seem overkill, and as I wrote
the code for the first time, I did not actually do it this way. However, I feel
like it would be nice to get these things out of the way. Plus, it will allow
us to see how all of these features play together in real code.

So, let's get to it!


## Submodules

Before we make our first step toward handling events, I would like to add a new
_module_ to our project. A module is just a way to keep our code structured. We
could, in theory, write everything in a single file and in a single namespace,
but it would get pretty messy, pretty quickly. A compiler doesn't care, but a
human does. So, we're going to put our event-related code in a separate file.

To do that, we have to add the `events.rs` file to our `src/` folder.

    $ <editor> src/events.rs

This will be our `events` module. Inside this file, we will declare a structure
(a custom type) which wraps the `EventPump` provided by SDL. Because we are
strategically lazy human beings, we will `use` this type.

```rust
extern crate sdl2;
use self::sdl2::event::EventPump;
```

One thing you might notice is the `self` keyword appearing in the path to the
`EventPump`. This means: _this path is relative to the current module_. This
works because, by adding `extern crate sdl2` at the top of our file, we _added_
the content of the `sdl2` crate to our module. It then acts as a _private_
sub-module of `::events`.

Alternatively, because we added `extern crate sdl2` to our main file &mdash;
and it would work the same way if this line was present in the `lib.rs` file of
a library &mdash;, we could do it this way:

```rust
use ::sdl2::event::EventPump;
```

Notice that we did not include an `extern crate` statement in here. This is
called the _absolute path_ (where the _root_ of your path is the main file of
your crate). The way you do it depends on your preference. This is also why we
can use an absolute path when _using_ a structure in the standard library, from
anywhere in the program: an `extern crate std` statement is automatically added
by the _prelude_, at the begin of the `main.rs` or `lib.rs` file.

If you compile this code right now, you will probably not see any difference.
This is because we have not yet told Rust that `events` is a module, and more
precisely that it is a module _whose parent is :: (main.rs)_. We do that by
adding the following line somewhere at the top of the `src/main.rs` file:

```rust
mod events;
```

Once that's done, Rust will first look to see whether there is a file called
`events.rs` in the same directory as its parent. If there is none, then it will
search the directory for another folder called `events/`, which contains a file
named `mod.rs`. If there is, then the content of `mod.rs` is chosen to be that
of the module. For now, though, we will stick to a flat structure.


## Lifetimes crash course

Now, back to our `events.rs` file! The first step in handling events is all
about wrapping the EventPump provided by the SDL context. So, we will add the
following code to our new module:

```rust
pub struct Events<'p> {
    pump: EventPump<'p>
}
```

Now, what are these `<'p>` all over the place?

I like to think of the list inside `<>` as being a _type configuration_. In
languages like C++, _generics_ allow you to assign a _type_ to a collection,
one which specifies the type of the objects that inhabit it. In Rust, not
only does the typesystem know about _types_, it also knows about these things
called _lifetimes_. Lifetimes are a way to express _A should not outlive B_
and, while type parameters begin with a capital letter, like `T`, lifetime
parameters begin with a lowercase letter and are prefixed by an apostrophe,
like `'p`.

Lifetimes are the thing that everybody refer to when they say that, in Rust,
_you cannot have dangling pointers_. You cannot have them because it would mean
that you tried to get the value that the reference _points to_ after it had
been destroyed, which would mean that your reference outlived the _thing_ it
points to... But Rust's typesystem ensures, through lifetimes, that it cannot
happen, so if you were to make a mistake of the sort, you would get an error at
_compile time_, instead of at _run time_.

Lifetimes in Rust are as omnipresent as are types. In fact, even the
_hello world_ program uses them behind the scenes, although in the same way
that Rust allows you to omit types, most of the _lifetime business_ is
automatically inferred by the compiler!

And, like with types parameters, there are a few places where Rust asks you to
be explicit about what you are doing. I'm talking about function and type
declarations (although Rust also helps with lifetime when declaring functions).

The way you get an `EventPump` is by calling `sdl_context.event_pump()`. We
could image the type signature of the method being:

```rust
fn event_pump<'p>(&'p mut self) -> EventPump<'p>;
```

The types in this signature inform us that the `event_pump` method takes a
mutable reference to `sdl_context` (`self`) and returns an `EventPump`. What
the lifetimes tell us, however, is way more interesting. In functions, if an
argument and a returned value have the same lifetime, then it means that
_the returned value must not outlive the argument it depends on_. By simply
looking at the function signature, we know that the event pump must not live
longer than the context.

It would not make much sense otherwise, because then we would wait for events
that would never come. In a very deep sense, lifetimes are not only a way to
talk to the compiler about our data, but even more they're a way to talk to
other programmers (and future you) about what the invariants on the data are.
This is _much better_ than simply adding it to the documentation (which would
be the case in a C or Python library), because while programmers can get
distracted, a computer will always catch their errors if they are programmed
to.

When you'll start making things on your own, you will quickly realise that Rust
doesn't tolerate even the slightest ambiguity. It is very frustrating at first,
but once your code actually compiles and you've written a few tests for it, you
can be confident that it is _correct_, and this is really important.

You will spend more time trying to tell the compiler what you want, and less
chasing down silly bugs such as dangling pointers and data races.


## Actually pumping the events

Now that we know a little bit more about lifetimes and the behaviour of an
`EventPump`, we can start to wrap it. For real this time! Let's get back to
where we left:

```rust
use ::sdl2::event::EventPump;

pub struct Events<'p> {
    pump: EventPump<'p>
}
```

What we have done so far is declaring a public struct called `Events` (public
because it can be accessed from anywhere else in our codebase). We did not add
a `pub` keyword in front of the `pump` field, however, because we do not want
other parts of the program messing with it when we try to record the events,
which would make us miss some of them.

Our type shares a lifetime `'p` with its `pump` attribute, which means that the
compiler will make sure that `pump` will not outlive whathever it depends on,
and that neither will an `Events` instance.

We now add a static method called `new` to it, using an `impl` block:

```
impl<'p> Events<'p> {
    pub fn new(pump: EventPump<'p>) -> Events<'p> {
        Events {
            pump: pump
        }
    }
}
```

The first line declares a lifetime `'p` which can be accessed from anywhere in
the `impl` block. On the second one, we define a public static method called
`new`, which takes in an event pump and returns an instance of our struct. You
should notice that we did not need to use the `return` keyword. The value of
the function is set to that of its last non-semicolon-terminated expression.

Now, we can bind an `events` value inside our `main` function. We also have to
make `sdl_context` mutable so that the `EventPump` can poll events from it
behind the scene. Then, your `src/main.rs` file should look something like:

```rust
extern crate sdl2;
mod events;

use sdl2::pixels::Color;
use std::thread;


fn main() {
    // Initialize SDL2
    let mut sdl_context = sdl2::init().video()
        .build().unwrap();
    
    // Create the window
    let window = sdl_context.window("ArcadeRS Shooter", 800, 600)
        .position_centered().opengl()
        .build().unwrap();
    
    let mut renderer = window.renderer()
        .accelerated()
        .build().unwrap();
    
    let mut events = events::Events::new(sdl_context.event_pump());
    
    renderer.set_draw_color(Color::RGB(0, 0, 0));
    renderer.clear();
    renderer.present();
    
    thread::sleep_ms(3000);
}
```

Let us now do two things. First, we add a few public attributes to our `Events`
struct; then, we populate our object by pumping the events.

```rust
use ::sdl2::event::EventPump;

pub struct Events<'p> {
    pump: EventPump<'p>,
    
    pub quit: bool,
    pub key_escape: bool,
}

impl<'p> Events<'p> {
    pub fn new(pump: EventPump<'p>) -> Events<'p> {
        Events {
            pump: pump,
            
            quit: false,
            key_escape: false,
        }
    }
    
    pub fn pump(&mut self) {
        for event in self.pump.poll_iter() {
            use ::sdl2::event::Event::*;
            use ::sdl2::keyboard::Keycode::*;

            match event {
                Quit { .. } => self.quit = true,
                
                KeyDown { keycode, .. } => match keycode {
                    Some(Escape) => self.key_escape = true,
                    _ => {}
                },
                
                KeyUp { keycode, .. } => match keycode {
                    Some(Escape) => self.key_escape = false,
                    _ => {}
                },
                
                _ => {}
            }
        }
    }
}
```

I'll let you figure out what our modifications did by yourself, except for our
newly added `pump` method.

It takes for only argument a mutable reference to `self` in order to pump the
events and modify the state of `quit` and `key_escape`. When called, it gets
an _iterator_ to the events from `pump` and iterates over every one of them
using a `for` loop.

At the very beginning of the `for` loop, we can see what I call
_local use statements_. Those act like any `use` statement, except that they
are only effective inside their block. It allows us to write `Quit` and `KeyUp`
without polluting the module's namespace with identifiers that we will not need
anywhere else anyway.

Then, we see a `match` statement, which allows _pattern matching and destructuring_.
Before going any further, I would recommend you to read the following chapters
in the Rust book:

  * [Enums](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/enums.html)
  * [Match](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/match.html)
  * [Patterns](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/patterns.html)

So, as you might have guessed from staring at the above code excerpt, `event`
is an object of type `Event`, which is an enumeration. Then, on the following
line...

```rust
Quit { .. } => self.quit = true,
```

... we match for an event of type Quit. We do not care about its content: as
long as our user has asked to close the window, we set the `quit` attribute to
`true`. Then, two lines later, we have:

```rust
KeyDown { keycode, .. } => match keycode {
    Some(Escape) => self.key_escape = true,
    _ => {}
},
```

The first one is saying: _if the user presses a key_ (pattern),
_then take the value of its `keycode` field and assign it to the same name_
(destructuring). This value has type `Option<::sdl2::keyboard::Keycode>` and is
now available on right right side of the `=>` under the name `keycode`, so we
match over the destructured value.

You should be able to determine the meaning of the next few lines by yourself.
If you are not, then read the Book again or take a look at the corresponding
sections of [Rust by Example](http://rustbyexample.com/).


## Closing the window like a sane programmer

Let us now modify a bit our `src/main.rs` file. Replace everything under
`let mut events = ...` by:

```rust
'game_loop: loop {
    events.pump();
    
    if events.quit || events.key_escape {
        break 'game_loop;
    }
    
    renderer.set_draw_color(Color::RGB(0, 0, 0));
    renderer.clear();
    renderer.present();
}
```

As you can see, there is no more `thread::sleep_ms` and you can even remove the
corresponding `use` statement (in fact, the linter integrated inside `rustc`
will ask you to do so if you do not).

What we have here is an _infinite_ `loop`. In the second line, the `pump`
method borrows mutably `events`. Once it's done, it lends it back to the
`events` binding. The program then checks whether the user has tried to close
the window or pressed the escape key. If it is the case, then it _breaks_ out
of the main loop. Otherwise, it clears the screen with black, swaps the
buffers, and checks again.

We now have a sane window!

It is to be noted that the connection between lifetimes and the `'game_loop`
label is mostly symbolic: you cannot simply go around and define lifetimes on
blocks. In fact, you better simply think of it as a label in Java, except that
its name begins with an apostrophe.

That's all I got for today. In the [next article](#),
we will use macro wizardry and `if let` statements to get events from a few
other keys. We will use these later when we build our menu and control our
player's ship.

Until then, keep rusting!


## BONUS: Lifetime dependencies

When adding type parameters to a function's signature, we may write something
like:

```rust
fn sum_vec<T: Add<T, Output = T>>(args: Vec<T>) -> T;
```

You do not need to understand everything. Just notice the colon after the
declaration of the type `T` between the `<>`. This colon means: _depends on_.
In this case, `T` must implement the trait `Add<T, Output = T>`. That is, one
must be able to add two objects of type `T` and get a result of type `T`.

With lifetimes, we can do something similar:

```rust
fn do_things<'a, 'b: 'a>(x: &'a Thing, y: &'b OtherThing);
```

Here, we have _`'b` depends on `'a`_. In Rust, this means that anything with
lifetime `'b` must not outlive anything else with lifetime `'a`. In fact, it
is even possible for type parameters to depend on lifetimes, but this is a
story for another time...