---
layout: post
title:  "ArcadeRS 1.0: The project"
categories: arcaders
---

> Update 2015-07-25: Changed library to rust-sdl2 0.6, no change to rust code.

This is the introduction of a series whose objective is to explore the Rust
programming language and ecosystem through the development of a simple,
old-school shooter. It is composed of 16 parts, excluding this introduction:

  1. [A simple window](/arcaders/arcaders-1-1/), where we install SDL2
  2. [Event handling](/arcaders/arcaders-1-2/), where we discuss lifetimes
  3. [More event handling](/arcaders/arcaders-1-3/), where we discuss macros
  4. [Views](/arcaders/arcaders-1-4/), where we learn about boxes, pattern matching, trait objects, and dynamic dispatch
  5. [Switching views](/arcaders/arcaders-1-5/), where we use boxes, pattern matching, trait objects, and dynamic dispatch
  6. [A moving rectangle](/arcaders/arcaders-1-6/), where we draw _things_
  7. [Main menu](#), where we play with textures and Rust's vectors
  8. [Sprites](#), where we create shareable images
  9. [Backgrounds](#), where we handle resizing, scale and translate through time
  10. [The player's ship](#), where we control a multi-sprite object
  11. [Shooting bullets](#), where we handle resource pooling
  12. [Animated sprites](#), where we render animated asteroids
  13. [Asteroid attack!](#), where we make multiple objects interact
  14. [Explosions](#), where we see things do _boom_.
  15. [Music](#), where we hear things go _boom_.
  16. [High score & wrap-up](#), where we play with the filesystem


This tutorial was written for people who are already somewhat familiar with the
craft of software development, perhaps even through a scripting language, and
who have just discovered this strange beast called _Rust_. They skimmed through
the [Book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/), read plenty of blog posts about
how this familiar-looking language supposedly challenges all previous ideas
about software safety and, excited, want to discover how Rust _really works out_
in practice.

What I demand of the reader is that he or she (or it?) understands such concepts
as interfaces, methods, conditional structures, and (basic) static typing. Most
of the time, the meaning of these terms will be self-evident from the context.
However, if these pose a problem to you, then be informed that I will not go to
great lengths to explain them.

I also expect you to have already _learned_ a bit of Rust prior to reading this
tutorial, at least from a high level. For example, you must understand what
Rust's `use` statement does, at least in the `main.rs` file, however there is
no need to be an expert in the subject as we will discover its subtleties
together.

In the next couple of weeks, we are going to build a simple space shooter based
on Mike Geig's superb [2D Game Development Course](http://fixbyproximity.com/2d-game-development-course/),
and a basic library called _phi_ which will provide us with the basic components
required by 2D games, such as _views_ (called _screens_ in LibGDX), _rectangles_
with built-in (albeit basic) collision detection, and _animated sprites_.

The libraries we are going to use for that will be AngryLawyer's SDL2 bindings,
version 0.6, which you can see [here](https://github.com/AngryLawyer/rust-sdl2),
and the associated plugins.

Before we continue, I want to stress that you do not need to have mastered Rust
prior to reading this tutorial. On the contrary, exploring Rust's subtleties is
one of its objectives, if not the main one because, let's be honest, I do not
recommend to use _phi_ in production. However, you need to have at least
skimmed through [the book](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/README.html) or
[Rust by Example](http://rustbyexample.com/).

Basically, I will not explain the syntax, but how to _use_ it to make things.

So, without further ado, [let's get to it](/arcaders/arcaders-1-1)!

## Special thanks

* __Thomas Pl&uuml;mpe__ for his extensive review and typo hunting.
