---
layout: post
title: "Basic QM 1: The single spin"
categories: quantum
---

After going through [Leonard Susskind](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leonard_Susskind)'s
[Theoretical Minimum](http://theoreticalminimum.com/) video series (which I hope
will help me understand R. Shankar's _Principles of Quantum Mechanics_), I
think I finally _got_ the basic idea behind quantum mechanics. Here's my
takeaway from this series.

This article covers everything that we can learn from a single-spin system. That
is, there's no entanglement (yet).

You should note that this is _not_ meant to be an introduction to quantum
mechanics, but rather a remainder/studying tool for those who already know a bit
about the subject. It should be especially useful for those watching Susskind's
lectures.


## States and observables

In quantum mechanics, the _things_ that we can measure are represented by what
are called _observables_. One example would be $\sigma_z$, which describes the
measurement of a spin along the z-axis.

States, on the other hand, are the _stuff_ that we can apply a measurement
to. We represent them using Dirac's notation, i.e. a spin pointing _up_
would be $\left|u\right>$ and a spin pointing down would be $\left|d\right>$.

Let us choose the convention that our _measurement apparatus_ shows "+1" when we
measure the _up_ spin and "-1" when we measure the _down_ spin. In quantum
mechanics, observables are matrices, while states are vectors. We can thus
_define_ our states and observables such that:

$$\sigma_z \left|u\right> = +1\left|u\right>$$
$$\sigma_z \left|d\right> = -1\left|d\right>$$

That is, $\left|u\right>$ and $\left|d\right>$ are eigenvectors of $\sigma_z$.
In fact, this is pretty much the definition of a possible state in quantum
mechanics: the wave function can only collapse on an eigenvector of the
observable measured and the result of that measurement (whatever the machine
shows us) is its eigenvalue. We'll come back to this in a minute.


## Bases and observables

This is the part that took me a while to figure out: how does one come up with
the components of the observable matrix and its eigenvectors. It turns out that
the choice of basis is mostly arbitrary: we get to decide of what numbers we
assign to different measurements.

Remember that we _defined_ $\sigma_z\left|u\right> = +1\left|u\right>$, because
that is the value that we wanted our apparatus to display. Now, all we need to
choose is which basis to use for our states. For this task, quantum mechanics
has only on rule:

> Distinguishable states (e.g. _up_ and _down_) are represented by a basis of
> orthonormal vectors.

That is, $\left|u\right>$ and $\left|d\right>$ must be orthogonal and have a
length of one. If you recall your basic linear algebra course, this means that:

$$\vec{u} \cdot \vec{d} = 0$$
$$\vec{u} \cdot \vec{u} = \vec{d} \cdot \vec{d} = 1$$

With Dirac's notation, we would write this as:

$$\left<u|d\right> = 0$$
$$\left<u|u\right> = \left<d|d\right> = 1$$

From those constraints, it is clear that the _best_ choice of basis for this
problem would be to set

$$\left|u\right> = \begin{bmatrix} 1 \\ 0 \end{bmatrix} ;\ \ \
  \left|d\right> = \begin{bmatrix} 0 \\ 1 \end{bmatrix}$$

Not only does this basis easily describe those two states, it also allows us to
come up with $\sigma_z$ in a few seconds:

$$\sigma_z = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 \\ 0 & -1 \end{bmatrix}$$

You should check that this works properly. The idea you should get from this
section is that, if we have an observable $L$ which allows us to measure some
value in $\{\lambda_1, \lambda_2, ...\}$, we can generally use the
_standard basis_, that is, the <i>i<sup>th</sup></i> element of the
<i>i<sup>th</sup></i> basis vector is 1, while the others are 0. This generates
an orthonormal basis of eigenvectors
$\{\left|\lambda_1\right>,\left|\lambda_2\right>,...\}$ such that
$L\left|\lambda_1\right> = \lambda_1\left|\lambda_1\right>$. In this basis, the
observable can simply be written as:

$$
L = \begin{bmatrix}
    \lambda_1 && 0 && 0 \\
    0 && \lambda_2 && 0 \\
    0 && 0 && ...
\end{bmatrix}
$$

For the rest of this article, we will only focus on observables that do not have
two independent eigenvectors with the same eigenvalue. If this were to be the
case, things may start to be more complicated, although I'm pretty confident
that it would still work here.

Before we continue, I would like to note that $\left<u\right|$ is defined to be
the covector whose elements are the complex conjugate of $\left|u\right>$'s.
That is,

$$\left|u\right> = \begin{bmatrix} a \\ b \end{bmatrix} \iff
  \left<u\right| = \begin{bmatrix} a^* && b^* \end{bmatrix}
$$

Therefore,

$$\left<u|d\right> = \begin{bmatrix} 1 && 0 \end{bmatrix}
    \begin{bmatrix} 0 \\ 1 \end{bmatrix} = 0
$$

So far, we have only been dealing with real numbers, but quantum mechanics
actually revolves around complex vector spaces, so you should expect to see some
complex numbers soon enough.


## Superposition and wave function

Right now, we can describe what happens when we measure a spin oriented _up_ or
_down_, but this is quite limited. Moreover, quantum mechanics is probabilistic,
right? Well, where are the probabilities then!

This is where superposition comes into play. The idea is simple: if you have a
spin which is not oriented toward the z-axis (e.g. it may have been prepared
along the x-axis), then we cannot predict the result of a single measurement.
The trick, in this case, is to describe what happens _on average_ over a large
number of similar measurements.

This bring us to _superposition_ states. When you define your states as above,
with every possible outcome associated with a basis vector, we can describe a
mix of them as:

$$\left|\Psi\right> = \sum_{j} \psi(j)\left|\lambda_j\right>$$

In this definition, $\psi(j)$ is called the _wave function_ (for historical
reasons). It assigns a _probability amplitude_ of measuring $\lambda_j$. To get
the _actual probability_ of getting this value, we simply compute:

$$P_{ROB}\left[ \lambda_j \right] = \psi^*(j)\psi(j)$$

Let us consider the case of a state oriented toward the positive x-axis. Because
it is midway between _up_ and _down_, it must have 50% probability of resolving
to either possibility. We generally define it as:

$$\left|r\right> = {1 \over \sqrt{2}}\left|u\right> + {1 \over \sqrt{2}}\left|d\right>$$

This this case, the wave function can be described as:

$$\psi(u) =  \psi(d) = {1 \over \sqrt{2}}$$

Therefore,

$$P_{ROB}\left[ +1 \right] = \psi^*(u)\psi(u) = {1 \over \sqrt{2}} \cdot {1 \over \sqrt{2}} = {1 \over 2}$$
$$P_{ROB}\left[ -1 \right] = \psi^*(d)\psi(d) = {1 \over \sqrt{2}} \cdot {1 \over \sqrt{2}} = {1 \over 2}$$

You will notice that the sum of the probabilities is $1$. This must always be
the case for us to be logically consistent. As such, we require that

$$\forall \left|\Psi\right>:\ \sum_j P_{ROB}\left[ \lambda_j \right] = \sum_j \psi^*(j)\psi(j) = 1$$

Which is simply the inner product of $\left|\Psi\right>$ with itself, i.e.
$\left<\Psi|\Psi\right> = 1$.

<!--
What if we prepared our spin at some angle of the side
sqrt(cos(θ), sqrt(sin(θ))), <Ψ|Ψ> = cos(θ)^2 + sin(θ)^2
-->

How does one verify the result of an experiment, though? If the result is random
every time, there doesn't seem to be a way to do so. Except that the result is
_not_ random every time. Recall that, at the very beginning, I said: the wave
function can only _collapse_ on an eigenvector of the observable measured. What
does that mean?

Simply that a measurement, in quantum mechanics, disturbs the system... and it
kinda makes sense. How do you measure the position of a particle? You throw a
photon in its face at about 300'000 km/s. In those conditions, you would
expect the particle's velocity to change &mdash; which it does, so you cannot
measure both its position and velocity at the same time, as you would do for
everyday objects. This is because those are so massive that they do not care
about the billions of photon hitting them every second.

It's obviously more complicated than that but, for the moment, this is a <i>good
enough</i><sup>TM</sup> analogy.

This is also why quantum computers require such extreme care: computation is a
complex process and the mere wiggle of nearby particles due to heat, or some
electromagnetic wave passing by, can screw it up.

Similarly, when you try to see whether the spin is _up_ or _down_, you pull the
spin toward either of these states. Which one is non-deterministic but, once
this is done, you can repeat the experiment as many times as you want and get
the same answer. However, if you measure the particle along the x-axis and try
again, you will get once again a random answer. In other words,

$$
\left|\Psi\right> : \sum_{j} \psi(j)\left|\lambda_j\right> \rightarrow \left|\lambda_k\right>
$$

That is, the state _becomes_ $\left|\lambda_k\right>$, the eigenvector
corresponding to the measured value.


## Multiple observables for the same state

Being able to measure a spin along the z-axis is nice, but it would be better to
be able to measure it along any axis. For that, we have $\sigma_x$ and
$\sigma_y$. You can think of those as turning your apparatus toward any
direction and passing your spin through it. As before, we would expect that:

$$\begin{matrix}
    \text{Right:} && \sigma_x \left|r\right> = +1\left|r\right> \\
    \text{Left:} && \sigma_x \left|l\right> = -1\left|l\right> \\
    \text{In:} && \sigma_y \left|i\right> = +1\left|i\right> \\
    \text{Out:} && \sigma_y \left|o\right> = -1\left|i\right> \\
\end{matrix}
$$

From there on, we have two choices. Either we change our basis so that those
states are described similarly to $\left|u\right>$ and $\left|d\right>$, or we
keep this basis and continue from there. No basis is _more real_ than any other,
and changing it wouldn't modify the physical meaning of the measurement, but it
isn't really _useful_. So, we will keep the $(\left|u\right>$, $\left|d\right>)$
basis and see where it leads us.

That is, we will define

$$\left|u\right> = \begin{bmatrix} 1 \\ 0 \end{bmatrix} ;\ \ \
  \left|d\right> = \begin{bmatrix} 0 \\ 1 \end{bmatrix}$$

What do we know about $\{\sigma_\lambda\}$?

Well, we know that we cannot measure any two observables at the same time. In
other words, the order in which we measure them will change the final result.
This is expressed in the language of linear algebra as two matrices which are
not commutative, that is, $\sigma_x\sigma_y \ne \sigma_y\sigma_x$. Physicists
have created a simple piece of notation to express exactly this: the
_commutator_.

$$[L,M] = LM - ML$$
$$[L,M] \ne \mathbf 0 \iff LM - ML \ne \mathbf 0 \iff LM \ne ML$$
$$[L,M] = \mathbf 0 \iff LM = ML$$

We also know that $\left<r|l\right>=\left<i|o\right>=0$, that is, we should be
able to distinguish between two opposite spins parallel to the measurement.

Finally, we are allowed (and, in this case, we are forced) to use complex
numbers as the elements of the eigenvectors and the observables. Here's the
typical definition for those:

$$\left|r\right>
    = \begin{bmatrix} {1 \over \sqrt{2}} \\  {1 \over \sqrt{2}} \end{bmatrix}
    = {1 \over \sqrt{2}}\left|u\right> + {1 \over \sqrt{2}}\left|d\right>
$$
$$\left|l\right>
    = \begin{bmatrix} {1 \over \sqrt{2}} \\  {-1 \over \sqrt{2}} \end{bmatrix}
    = {1 \over \sqrt{2}}\left|u\right> - {1 \over \sqrt{2}}\left|d\right>
$$

$$\left|i\right>
    = \begin{bmatrix} {1 \over \sqrt{2}} \\  {i \over \sqrt{2}} \end{bmatrix}
    = {1 \over \sqrt{2}}\left|u\right> + {i \over \sqrt{2}}\left|d\right>
$$
$$\left|o\right>
    = \begin{bmatrix} {1 \over \sqrt{2}} \\  {-i \over \sqrt{2}} \end{bmatrix}
    = {1 \over \sqrt{2}}\left|u\right> + {-i \over \sqrt{2}}\left|d\right>
$$

Therefore

$$\sigma_x = \begin{bmatrix} 0 && 1 \\ 1 && 0 \end{bmatrix}$$
$$\sigma_y = \begin{bmatrix} 0 && -i \\ i && 0 \end{bmatrix}$$

You should check that, indeed, those matrices have the correct eigenvectors.
This can be done by simple matrix/vector multiplication. You can also multiply
the observables together and see that they do not commute.


<!--
## From ket to bra

$$\left|\Psi\right> = \alpha\left|1\right> + \beta M\left|2\right>$$
$$\left<\Psi\right| = \left<2\right|M^\dagger \beta^* + \left<1\right|\alpha^* $$

However, summation is commutative, so we generally keep the same ordering for
the added terms.
-->


## Hermitian operators

You might have noticed that until now, even though we have played with complex
numbers in our states and observables, we have only _measured_ real numbers. The
natural question then, is can we obtain _complex numbers_ as the result of a
measurement. The answer is _no_, this is not allowed in quantum mechanics.

To ensure this, we require that the observables are _hermitian_. That is, their
_hermitian conjugate_ is themselves:

$$H^\dagger = H^{T*}= H \iff H_{ij} = H_{ji}^* $$

It turns out that hermitian operators can only have real eigenvectors.
